---
layout: post
title: "Android to iOS: process and initial thoughts"
subtitle: "wherein the tiger changes his stripes"
date: 2014-11-25
nth: 1
permalink: /blog/2014/11/25/1/android-to-ios-process-and-initial-thoughts.html
summary: "I replaced my Nexus 5 with a regular iPhone 6, and have so far lived to tell the tale."
author: Ron
---

## {{ page.title }}

## _{{ page.subtitle }}_

{{ page.summary }}


### Rationale

I've been an avid Android fan (either raw AOSP or CyanogenMod distributions)
since Cupcake, and I feel I have a good sense of what discerning Android users
expect from apps on that platform. I not only have an academic understanding of
[Google's design guidelines for Android](http://developer.android.com/design/),
but also years of practical experience with UX conventions.

When it comes to iOS, my experience is academic and distant. I'm familiar with
[Apple's design guidelines for iOS](https://developer.apple.com/design/), and I
test projects on the platform frequently. Yet I have not had to live in that
foreign land and learn its customs, I've been an iOS tourist.

So when a family member prompted me to perform the sacred ritual of
"hand-me-down", it seemed like an ideal opportunity to address the gap in my
professional experience.


### Cloud Lifeboat

Such a move would be daunting in the past. I dimly recall lining up a Nokia
phone to beam my address book as infrared light to it's replacement kin. And
just forget about it if the two phones weren't from the same manufacturer.

Thankfully, it's been a fairly routine affair these days, made even easier if
you managed to avoid platform-specific apps and services as I have. Apple even
has a guide on how to [move content from your Android phone to iPhone](http://support.apple.com/en-au/HT201196).


#### Email, Contacts and Calendars

In _Settings_ -> _Mail, Contacts, Calendars_ I configured my personal and work
Gmail accounts, my Microsoft and ISP-provided email accounts, as well as my
iCloud account (of course).

I disabled Notes synchronisation for everything except iCloud, to avoid extra
cruft accumulating in my Gmail accounts. For those Gmail accounts, I've also
disabled Mail synchronisation. I'm using Google's Inbox and Gmail apps for iOS
instead of Apple's Mail. It's important to me that my primary email accounts
function correctly, and Mail has a history of being problematic (due partly to
Google's particular flavour of IMAP).


#### Authenticators

Warning: do not erase your old handset until you've migrated your OTP code
generators!

I've learnt the hard way with previous handset replacements that it's a very
bad idea to procrastinate doing this part. I tend to transition OTP code
generators as I setup their associated accounts, just to be on the safe side.


#### Productivity

Google's Drive suite follows me everywhere, although I do plan on evaluating
Microsoft and Apple's cross-platform entrants in the office suite race.

I have a todo lists (including a shared grocery list) in Wunderlist. We use
Trello at work here and there, and I've used it for brainstorming for personal
projects, such as organising my recent move.


#### Social Networks and News

The Twitter, Facebook and Google+ apps are some of the earliest apps I'll
install on any new device. The presence of these apps improves the login
experience in a some apps, but most other apps lean on webviews for social
authentication.

These organic, squishy sources play an increasing role in my awareness of world
events, etc, but I still rely on RSS feeds and "real" news apps for the most
part. To that end, I have cross-platform subscriptions in Tumblr and Feedly, and
I'll thumb through Google's Play Newstand app for free articles to pass the
time.

I would have installed an official GitHub app if there was one for iOS. The
Stack Exchange app functions at least as well as its Android counterpart.


#### Photos and Videos

I configure the Google+ app to back up my photos and videos automatically. I've
not lost a single photo or video since using this feature, across 4 previous
Nexus Androids.

I'll leave Apple's equivalant iCloud features enabled, but I'm weary of the 5GB
baseline quota (compared to Google's 15GB). I suspect I'll have to subscribe for
a larger cap.


#### Commercial Content

My iTunes collection comprises but a few dozen tracks. Google's Play network
meets the majority of my commercial content needs: Play Books, Play Music and
Play Movies. Thankfully, Google provides iOS apps for these services. Having to
recreate my music playlists would have otherwise been time-consuming.


#### Podcasts

[PocketCasts by ShiftyJelly](http://www.shiftyjelly.com/pocketcasts) is the best
Android app for podcasts (I worked my way through a handful before this).
Naturally, they offer an iOS app, and there's even a [web player](https://play.pocketcasts.com/)
for traditional computers.

Podcast subscriptions, listened episodes and even position in each episode is
synchronised via a cloud account, and ShiftyJelly has tailored the smartphone
apps to the strengths and conventions of each platform. Worth every penny, for
the peace of mind alone.


#### Games

Smartphone games don't generally appeal to me much. A recent exception is
Monument Valley, which is available on both Android and iOS. I've purchased it
on both platforms to try to support the developer. Just enchanting.

Google's Ingress is also cross-platform, and is effectively a smartphone MMORPG
with a strong focus on geolocation. As an MMO, much of the gameplay boils down
to farming and long-term investment, but it makes for an amusing distration.


### Abandoned Data

My SMS messages did not survive the transition. Almost all of my messaging needs
are met by Google Hangouts, Facebook Messenger or Slack. I've never been the
sort that saves favourite SMSs or anything, so there's nothing worth going to
any trouble over.

Whilst not technically abandoned, there's no official Google Keep app for iOS.
As such, I'll probably transition my lists over to Wunderlist and my notes over
to something else (probably Google Drive or the iOS Notes app).


### Easing In

Whilst immersing myself in Google services has made the transition laughably
easy, I'm aware that this does somewhat defeat the purpose of this move. I won't
be properly experiencing iOS UX conventions if Google's cross-platform Material
Design features prominently in my smartphone usage.

Over the coming weeks, I plan to shift:

- my podcasts over to the iOS Podcast app
- my office email from Gmail to the iOS Mail app
- some of my content consumption over to iTunes (from Google Play)

I dearly wish Apple offered Windows and Android apps. I'd have no trepidation at
all investing further into their cloud services if that were the case.

In future posts, I'll review the iPhone and iOS itself. Please leave comments if
you have any suggestions for a recent platform-hopper such as myself, or if you
have specific questions that you'd like answered in my upcoming review(s).
